# Notes from: _A Natural History of Thinking_

## Cooperation
- Chimpanzees and other great apes perform group behaviors and actions that serve to forage for food, provide protection against attackers and attack others, and travel. However, these group actions differ from human group behavior in that they are not truly for the purpose of behaving in a group with true cooperation or coordination, but rather each individuals is selfishly pursuing his or her own desires for the food item, be it a monkey or a banana, and whoever gets it will try to consume it all him or herself. 

- In contrast, cooperative group efforts humand engage in are for the sake of cooperation, with a lot of coordination, and group-level behaviors. Individuals have to reign in their selfish desires and do what would make the group prosper even if it results in costs at the individual level. 

- A key event in human evolutionary history that set us down a path of increasing sociality is the process of interdependence. One reason for why humans became more cooperative is because the fitness of individuals became tied with the descisions and cooperative actions of other individuals. 
- For example in foraging. Many food items that humans hunted required coordination and cooperation among various people and so, whether or not a particular human would strave was largely dependent on the behavior of others, which in turn fed back on that individuals willingness to belong and sacrifice to the group. 
- As a natural consequence of interdependence humans began to be more socially selective and evaluative of others as potential collaborators or cheaters in the group. Therefore, unlike the other great apes, humans began to worry about others as well as thesmelves as being good collaboration partners. 
- Cooperative events meant that individuals began to be involved more in group behaviors that resembled the game theoretic strcuture of the stag-hunt. Essentially, both me and another person, X, can hunt hares all day, low cost but low reward predators that only requires our individual effort. However, X and I can pool our efforts and go for a much bigger game, the stag. It is harder to get but yields a much higher reward. It requires the joint effort of us both. Individuals also face epistemic barriers in such coordination efforts because while I might know that I want to go for the stag and even know that X wants to go for the stag, I might not know that X knows that I want to go for the stag. And so, there must first be common ground or common knowledge between us in order for us to coordinate our decision-making and coordination actions. Being adept at this kind of strategic recursive mind reading and attuned to whether common ground exists between you and another requires a kind of joint intentionality that Tomasello sees as a key prerequiste for coordinating small-scale collaboration and, later, cooperative communication. 
- Joint intentinonality requires the formation of joint goals, and knowing our individual roles within that joint function. 
- He writes,
    
    *Collaborating toward a joint goal created a new kind of social engagement, a joint intentinoality, in which "we" are hunting antelopes together (or whatever), with each partner playing her own interdependent role. This dual-level structure of simultaneous sharedness and individuality -- a joint goal but with individual roles -- is a uniquely human form of second-personal joint engagement requiring species-unique cognitive skills and motivational propensities.*
-  Tomasello argues that the first ways in which humans communicated cooperatively was through pantomiming and pointing. This helped individuals communicate and solved some problems of cooperation and coordination, but also created new ones, perhaps most importantly, problems of opaque intentions. 
-  In the absence of more refined mechanisms of communication it also hard to see whether ones communicative intent is requestive or informative. This is even true in fourteen-month-year-olds who only point. 
-  To comprehend iconic gestures (e.g., pretending to hammer a nut instead of actually doing it) the individual has to be able to see intentional actions performed outside of their normal instrumental contexts as communication--because they are marked as such by the communicator via various kinds of ostensive signals (e.g., eye contact). 

### Aside - Important role of space in human cognition:

- Spatial conceptualizations play a prominent role in humnan cognition. Episodic memory, for example, has intimate connections to spatial cognition. 
- Additionally, humans often talk about abstract situations or entities metaphorically or analogically in terms of concrete spatial relationships: we talk about putting things into and taking them out of our lectures, falling in love, coming to his senses, losing one's mind, and so on. 
- Johnson (1987) identified a number of so-called image schemas that seem to permeate our thinking, such as _containment_ (in and out of a lecture), _part-whole_ (the foundation of our relationship), _link_ (we are connected), _obstacle_ (my lack of education gets in the way of my social life), and _path_ (we are on our way to marriage). 
- Many scholars have noticed the inordinate role of space in our language grammars. 
- Also the way actors cause effects in in other entitites (e.g., investors' anxieties crashed the stock market). 
- Some have noticed how complex relationships are expressed spatially, with topological relationships predominating. 
- Spatial relationships might provide the foundation on which early childhood langague is first built. 

- In contrast to chimpanzees, humans at a very young age (starting in preschool years) are concerned with the social evaluations of others, attempting to manage the impressions others have of them. This concern for how others evaluate them, and the concern with managing these impressions provides a new motive for actions, namely, to coordinate with the evaluative expectations of potential partners. 
- Individuals thus began to cede power over themsleves to the second-personal evaluations of others because these evaluations determined their future collaboration partners and opportunities. 
- This second-personal social pressure from collaborative partners on inividual action constitutes one origin of social norms of morality. 

    "Early humans simulated the evaluative judgments that others made of them with regard to their cooperative proclivitie--precursors to norms of morality--and also with regard to the intelligibility of their communicative acts--precursors to norms of rationality."

- Overview of Tomasello's framework: First humans make a big jump from other great apes in not only collaborating in parallel with each other but with cognitively representing a shared goal, with shared intentions, essentially, as "we" and not just a me and a you. And so, individuals can have joint attention to some object/task, and have a joint goal. It is joint here because it is not just that I see X and you see X, and that I see that you see X and you see that I see X, but that we have common ground/common knowledge (which is infinitely embedded knowledge) of the object or the task, enabling this shared sense of a goal or attention. 
- Additionally, with this shared intentionality, we can then collaborate in an agent-neutral way such that we are occupying positions or roles in our collaborative interaction, which are independent from us or the agents themselves. This provides a kind of normative force, social pressure, that encourages cooperative collaboration to some joint effort, because individulas ought or should do something since it is for the sake of "we" or the shared goal and not just an indivdual desire/goal. 
- 


