# Cultural Evolution of Intentionality in Moral Judgments

Curtin et al. (2020) argue that using and relying on mental states when making moral judgments is not a human universal and in fact is expected to negatively vary with the degree of kinship intensity present in one's culture. In other words, people in more WEIRD societies such as Americans, where the strength of kin-based institutions are weak relative to non-WEIRD people such as Pakistanis, where kin-based instiutions are strong, are expected to make much more use of mental states in their moral judgments. 

First of all, what do I mean by make use of mental states in moral judgments? What I mean is differnetiate in moral quality a behavior that results in intentional harm or one that results in accidental harm. Imagine the following two scenarios: On a busy street, person X on puts down her purse for a moment and when she isn't looking the person next to her, person Y, grabs it and quickly walks off. In a second scenario the same thing happens expect person Y takes person X's bag accidentaly, thinking it was her own. 

If you are American or Western or WEIRD you are likely to think there is an enormous difference between these two scenarios morally. You are likely more likely to want to see one over the other held accountable for what they did, punished, and punished with greater severity, etc. However, the moral difference in these two scenarios is not felt across all human socieites. It turns out that many non-WEIRD people are less likely to see these scenarios as morally different because they put little stock in the mental states involved and are only concerned with the outcome, which is the same in both scenarios, person Y stole from person X. 

## What are kin-based institutions? 

Kin-based institutions are packages of social norms anchored in our evolved kin psychology that serve to suppress or amplify the impacts of genealogical relatedness. These institutions structure patterns of marriage, residence, and mutual obligation, directing, for example, who should marry whom (e.g., are first cousins preferred or tabooed marriage partners?), where newly-weds should live, and who one's natural allies are. However, societies vary in how central kinship is to their identity and social relationships; this is called *kinship intensity*. 

Societies with _extensive_ kinship systems tend to encourage the formation of broad social networks with unrelated individuals, and often feature exogamy and bilateral descent. In contrast, in societies with _intensive_ kinship systems kin-based institutions tightly control and constrain personal relationships. These societies are often characterized by extended family networks, cousin marriage, polygny, endogamy, unilineal descent, and an increase in relatedness within kin groups. 

WEIRD societies have neither extensive or intensive kinship systems due to a set of changes that the medeival church put in place through the centuries that ultimately discouraged marriage with relatives, and led to the creation of small isolated nuclear families, exogamy, and residing outside of one's family they were born into. There is reason to belive that the variations in kinship intensity between societies affects human psychology, especially since they are the first institution people across all societies encounter when they are born into the world, which strongly affets developmental processes that are key to the creation of personal identity, and psychology. 

Curtin et al. (2020) proposes three distinct hypotheses for why the use of mental states in moral judgment should covary with kinship intensity: 

1. The benefit-to-cost ratio of considering mental states in the context of partner choice may be lower in societies with intensive kinship.
2. In societies with rigid, kin-based social networks and allegiances, outcome-focused moral judgments may culturally evolve as a way to sustain internal harmony. 
3. Intensive kin-based institutions may magnify the impact of social distance on mentalizing in moral judgment, leading to greater differences in reliance on mental states when judging outgroup members compared to ingroup members. 

In terms of the first hypotheses, the benefit-to-cost ratio of considering mental states in the context of partner choice may be lower in societies with intensive kinship. This is because the strength of kin-based institutions and adherence to norms and rules—in short, higher cultural tightness—makes predicting people's behavior accuraely more highly correlated with understanding and adhering to cultural norms as opposed to having to mind read, which comes at the cost of paying extra attention to intentional states of various individuals. In the world of high kinship intensity, knowing the social norms, network ties, and personal relationships—that is, external information—should be highly predictive of what people will do. If this is the case, relying on cognitive resources to probe the inner mental states of other individuals is likely too costly and not needed. 

In contrast, at the other end of the spectrum are societies with low kinship intensity, where social norms are few, not tightly followed, monitored, or enforced, and often in flux—in other words, these are culturally loose societies as opposed to tight societies. People in such societies tend to be individualistic, independent, self-oriented, and concerned about creativity. In these societies, knowing the relevant social norms and rules is a poor way of predicting the behavior of individuals. Thus, probing mental states 
usually pay-of when making judgments about behavior. 

In terms of the second hypothesis, outcome-focused norms of moral judgment may culturally evolve in kinship intensive societies as a way to quell conflicts, settle disputes, and sustain greater harmony since outcomes—what happened—are matters of facts that impassioned and competing clans can agree on as opposed to mental states—did he or she *mean* or *intend* to do it. This is esepcially important in arriving at appropriate levels of punishment that norm violaters should incur that are perceived as legitamate by everyone in the community. In such cases, disagreemments over mental states and inferred intentions are a potential source of social conflict. 

Lastly, in terms of the third hypothesis, intensive kinship may also influecne the reliance on mental states in moral judgments by tightening the ingroup, sharpening the distinction between ingroups and outgroups, and solidifying ingroup loyalty. Group membership and intergroup dynamics modulate cognition in many domains including moral culpability and intentionality. How we think about "us" tends to differ from how we think about "them." And people everywhere may be less likely to probe mental states and infer intentions of indiviudals from social outgroups, a divide that might be exaggerated in kinship intensive societies.


