# Why Culture Matters

There is probably no terrestial animal that has not had experience with this tiny creature. Far and away it is the most dominant terrestial animal that exists, located on every continent in massive numbers. This tiny creature is the humble ant. Human beings are the second most dominant terrestial animal, also located on every continent and occupying a vast array of behavioral niches. But there is a crucial difference in how the terrestial dominance occured in humans as opposed to ants. 

Ants have spread around the globe by speciating into more than 14,000 distinct species. In other words, populations of ants have been genetically altered via natural selection to adapt to the variety of different conditions that are conducive to survival on different aspects of the globe that differ dramatically in climate, temperature, resource availability, and so on. 

In contrast, humans have spread around the globe not by speciating—we are all one and the same species—but by adapting to the different environments and circumstances that nature poses. And we have done so at a much quicker pace than biological evolution could supply. In addition to being a biologically evolved species we are culturally evolved. 

Humans have often been compared to ants—for example, take a look at the work of famous ant biologist, Edward Wilson, or the more recent work of his mentee, Mark Moffett in the "Human Swarm"—and for good reason. Mark Moffett aptly demonstrates the number of similarities between ants and humans that exist purely as a product of scaling. In other words, human and ant societies have many similarities in both problems and solutions simply based on sheer number of individuals. For instance, both species have to solve problems of waste mangement, acquisition of an enormous amount of resources to sustain the  population, demarcation of societal boundaries, identification of societal members, and all the problems and solutions that come with cooperation on large scales such as free-riding, defection, and cheating. 

However, as many similarities there are between human and ant societies, there are also striking differences that speak to the importance of culture not only when it comes to the formation and maintaince of human societes, but also the behavioral and cognitive flexibility of individuals across societies. 

Take, for instance, the facilitation of violent and aggressive behaviors in young children. Napolean Chagnon has documented that among the Yanomamo parents—usually fathers—rather than supress the violent temper tantrums of their toddlers actually facilitate them and desire that they express these impulses. Chagnon writes how during a tempter tantrum where a father's son was hitting him on the face he smiled and expressed with fatherly pride how his son would grow to be strong and fierce rather than scolding him. This is also true for when sons beat on their sisters. 

In stark contrast, children in America grow up in an environment that places large costs on children who physically attack others. Parents discipline and shame their children for having tantrums in public and punish them in private. Both in the family environemnt and early on in the educational environment, children are taught to keep their hands to themsleves, sons are taught to be kind and nice to their sisters rather than hiting them, and so on. 

In other words, the environment in which children find themselves vary tremendously including its particular cultural practices, social norms and arrangements, and pattern of punishments and rewards given for certain behaviors over others. 

A large part of the explanation for our behavioral flexibility comes from ontogeny. Like our closley related primate cousins—chimpanzees and bonobos—we humans have a relatively long maturational period compared to most other animals. Evidence indicates that ontogeny provides an ample target for natural selection to act. 

Tomasello (2018) writes how according to modern evolutionary developmental biolgy or Evo-Devo, the targets of natural selection are not adult traits but ontogenetic pathways. In other words, natural selection acts on the process by which adult endpoints are constructed and not just on the actual endpoints themselves. Tomasello describes how an ontogenetic pathway may change in content, (e.g., the presence or absence of some psychological capacity) in timing (e.g., how early or late the psychological capacity emerges), and in plasticity (e.g., the degree to which the psychological capacity is influenceable by environmental factors). 

For instance, humans have a psychological capacity known as theory of mind, which is the ability to attribute mental states to other individuals and represent them as being distinct from our own. This ability has an ontogenetic pathway in that it arises at a particular point in time in and individuals life, around 3 or so years of age, develops and becomes more sophisticated with maturation, and differs in its timing and expression in different cultures, which differently encourage the expression of the ability. 

And so, in contrast to most animals, humans have a prolonged period of development. During this extended ontogenetic period we soak up the particular behaviors, capacities, rules, beleifs, and norms that make us an effective and competent member of a specific cultural and social environment. A straightforward example of this is langauage where no individual is born with some innate procliviy to acquire Chinese, English, Russian, etc. But rather all children have an innate ability to acquire a language, such as general rules that pick up on the regularities of speech, the grammatical structure, and the meaning beneath the words, which allows individuals to acquire the particular langauage of the culture into which they were born. 

A similar process likely occurs when it comes to other psychological capacities other than language. 