# Cooperation and the Origins of Culture

One of the best ways to assess human uniqueness is to compare human psychology to the psychology of our primate cousins, the great apes. Ideally, researchers could compare the psychology of modern day humans to other hominins, but unfortunately data on their psychology is nearly impossible to know since we don't have them around for us to run experiments on them. 

Some of the best research that has been done on comparative developmental psychology of uniquely human abilities has been done by developmental psychologists Michael Tomasello in his voluminous work in this area. He has done scores of carefully controlled experiments assessing collaborative and cooperative behaviors and the antecedent psychological processes therein such as gaze following, joint attention, and shared intentionality. 

In his most recent book _Becoming Human: A Theory of Human Ontogeny_ Tomasello summarizes his decades of research in this area and puts forward a comprehensive step-by-step theory of the origins of unique human collaborative, cooperative, and cultural capacities that have made humans so different and so successful. 

His account of unique human sociality begins with recognizing ape social-cognitive ontogeny. For instance, key competencies in ape social-cognitive ability include gaze following and representing the mental states of others, such as inferring intentions, and knowledge of others. These abilities emerge in apes around three to four years of age which, in humans, has migrated earlier in ontogeny to around one year of age. 

However, Tomasello argues that the ability to gaze follow and infer others' mental states is not sufficient for unique human sociality, and that humans have ontogenetically evolved new social-cognitive abilities on top of these great ape capacities that enable us to jointly attend to some reality, collectively cognitively represent this reality, and understand the unique perspectives of each individual within the joint attentional event. Tomasello refers to this uniquely human aspect of social-cognition as _shared intentionality_.

Shared intentionality is composed to two main processes, joint intentionality, which emerges around nine months of age and collective intentionality which emerges later in development at about three years of age. This two processes allow for a range of new and unique human social experiences that ultimately enable large-scale cooperation and the creation of culture. 

## The Ontogenetic Pathway to Human Sociality

For Tomasello, the first step in the ontogenetic pathway of human sociality is infants' emotion sharing in protoconversations at around two months of age. Emotion sharing evolved as a way for infants to affiliate and bond with their adult caregivers. Infant apes also exhibit a form of emotion sharing for the purpose of affiliating and bonding with their adult caregivers, and so the ontogentic pathway in humans can be described as a transformation of the basic great ape pattern since the basic process itself is the same but the emotional experiences are different in humans from apes. 

The second step is joint attention which emerges at around nine to twelve months of age. This ability is an expansion of infants social interaction to encompass a triangulation between themselves, an adult caregiver, and some object that is the target of both agent's attention. In contrast, apes certainly have the ability to represent the perspective, knowledge, and intentions of others, but it appears to be done so in an individualistic way where the two apes do not represent a "we" that triangulates their attention to some object or event. 

But humans are different. Combine the fact that human infants already possess a motivation to share emotional experiences with others with the fact that infants can triangulate attention, and you get a uniqulely human socially shared cognition rather than the individual social cognition of apes. Tomasello writes that the source of the "nine-month revolution" is that infants acquire the ability to form a joint agent, a "we," comprising two individual agents who act and experience together. Tomasello contends that the ability to do this requires social interaction and so, is not "built-in" or "innate" in the sense that it is an ability that emerges without the external feature of the environment of social interaction. However, social interaction is found in every human culture and likely was the case in all human cultures and societies that have ever existed and so it has likely become a regularly invariant/universal feature of societies. 

In a way, this tight connection between aspects of human psychology and regularly occurring features of human-made environments provides an indirect route to the dispensation of mental modules. Why would certain psychological capcities that emerge early in ontogeny and develop in discourse with regularly occuring features of human social environments need to be modularized? It seems that in these cases, modularity would be unparsimonious and wasteful from an evolutionary point of view and therefore unlikely to exist. The psychological "bet" baked into the evolutionary cognitive milleu is that social interaction is a regularly occuring feature of human environments, as water is to fish, air to birds, and sunlight to plants. And therefore particular psychological capacities of human sociality can be more easily acquired via interaction between the basic elements of social psycholgical competency—rather than elaborate mechanisms that are dedicated to a set of inputs that lead to outputs in some function or effect—and the spontaneous creation of uniquely human social environments that are the natural product of minds interacting. Therefore, Tomasello's account of the ontogeny of human sociality is not nativist, nor is it the opposite, socially learned, but is instead constructivist, requiring "the maturation of uniquely human capacities and the unique kinds of experience that these new capacities make possible" (p. 89). 

