# Mechanisms of Cultural Evolution
- Guided variation: This is when one individual acquires information from another and then modifies it according to individual learning processes. For example, acquiring some process and discarding the bits she thinks are irrelavant or annoying. This modified information is then transmitted to others.
- Individual learning: 

Distinct from guided variation or individual learning is cultural selection, which is defined as any condition where on cultural traits is more likely to be acquired or transmitted than other alternative traits. Unlike guided variation, cultural selection does not involve any modification of the trait itself, only changes in the frequency of the trait. The most obvious form of cultural selection involved content biases, where the intrinsic attractiveness of an idea, belief, or practice, etc. affects its probability of being acquired. 

Contet biases:

- Disgust bias: information that activates disgust is more likely to be remebered and therefore passed on. Research has shown that manipulaiting the disgustingness of information changes the likelihoood that people say they would pass on the information, with greater disgustingness encouraging greater transmittance. 
- Supernatural bias: beliefs or ideas that are minimially countinerintuitive such that they violate some of our folk intuitions but affirm others. For example, ghosts that walk through walls (counterintuitive) but also seek revenge (intuitive). The same is with souls and spirits. The violations of our intuitions make these ideas more memorable, but they are not so counterintuitive that we cannot picture them, remember them, or grasp them. 
- Spread biases: In addition to these informational biases that bias the acquisition and the spread of ideas, beliefs, practices, etc. there are features of things in terms of how htey are used that encourage spread: they have to give users a relative _advantage_ compared to existing things, be _simple_ enough to use so that people can easily adopt them, be _compatible_ with existing products, be _testable_ by early adoptors so there relative advantages can be discerned, and be _observeable_ to people. 
- Spread biases explaing the success of new technologies such as the mobile phone. In addition to explaining the spread of new ideas, these spread biases also explain the lack of spread of new ideas, beliefs, practices, etc. In one case, a health worker unsuccessfully tried to get Peruvian housewives to boil their water before drinking it to kill waterborne pathogens that were causing sickness. After an intensive education campaign only a tiny minority of households adopted the practice. The main reason being that it was a new practice that was _incompatible_ with the villagers folk beliefs regarding food and illness. The villagers believed that all foods and drinks had intrinsic "temperatures" unrelated to their actual temperatures that affected people. And they believed that sick people should avoid the extremes of food "temperatures" both hot and cold foods. This is in stark contrast to the Western theory of illness that tiny invisibe particles called pathogens contaminate food and drink and whe consumed can cause illness, and when killed by chemicals, boiling, etc. can prevent disease. 
- Guided variation is an individual process, but content biases are population-level, in other words, the latter depend on the variation of cultural traits in the population. Research has found that in contrast to guided variation processes, cultural biases follow an S-shaped curve of slow-fast-slow adoption, which reflects the fact that individuals adopt the cultural trait in relation to the population structure of the trait. In the beginning the new belief, practice, technology, etc is rare and so early adoption is slow, but then when people start adopting it others do so as well resulting in rapid adoption, which then leads to slow adoption as the variation in the trait falls due to most people adopting it. 
- In contrast, guided variation follows an r-shaped curve of Since it is an individual-level process that isn't affected by the population structure, the adoption is initially rapid and steady until it falls off because the adoption doesn't depend on initial rarity or the population structure. 
- Frequency dependent bias: using frequency of a trait in a population as a guide as to whether to adopt it, irrespective of its intrinsic properties. Conformity is _positive frequency-dependent bias_. Conformity, as defined by Boyd and Richerson, isn't simply choosing the most popular trait in the population, but rather _disproportionatly_ more likely adopting the most popular trait in the population relative to simply copying at random. 

Model-based biases:
- A third class of sources of cultural selection are features of traits that concern the identity from whom the cultural traits are being acquired. 
- Prestige bias: People preferentially attend to and copy from presitigious models, that is, individuals who are particularly prestiguous or skilled in certain contexts and skills. 
- Similarity bias: People preferentially attend to and copy from people who are similar to them in dress, accent, appearnace, etc. 
- Age bias: People preferentially attend to and copy from older individuals. 
- 