# Cultural Evolution of Large-Scale Cooperation
**From: Henrich & Muthukrishna 2020 (forthcoming)** 

- To explain the evolution of cooperation at larger scales, such as what we see at the group-level in cooperative hunter-gatherer groups of 200 individuals and also the cooperative social groups of modern WEIRD societies in the tens of millions of people, evolutionary theorists have gone beyond the processes of kin selection and reciprocity—both of which necessarily decline in these cases—recruitind evolutionary models that can sustain cooperation through processes of reputation, signaling, and punishment, as well as their combinations. 
- For instance, in typical models of diffuse punishment, individuals in a public goods game will pay—that is, incur a cost—to punish noncooperators and those who free-ride on the others contributions (i.e., free-riders or defectors). This can sustain cooperation by punishing free-riders but then it creates the problem of the "second-order free-rider problem," namely, the problem of individuals failing to punish free-riders because doing so is costly. One solution is to randomly designate a single punisher, since if there is only one punisher, the second-order free-rider problem vanishes. A second way to get around this problem is if third-party punishment is meant to signal otherwise hidden benefiical qualities like trustworthiness or cooperativeness to others. In this process, individuals signal their positive social qualities by punishing norm violators, which both sustains costly norms, such as large scale cooperation, and promotes beneficial future interactions for the signaler. A third solution proposes that after a norm violation, punishers signal their intent to punish and then punish if enough others also signal their punitive intentions. If too few people signal their intent to punish then punishers withold their sanctions. "By  coordinating their punishment and compelling defection into cooperation, this syste can guarantee that punishers end up in cooperative groups, and when they don't, they can still avoid the costs of punishment." 
- Large-scale cooperation can also be sustained by reputational systems, often known as _indirect reciprocity_.
- These models of large-scale cooperation reveal two additional important features of the mechanisms that sustain large-scale cooepration: (1) unlike in kin selection and direct reciprocity the underlying mathematics of these large-scale cooperation models is that they can sustain "any equally costly behavior regardless of whehter any benefit is delivered to the community. That is, they are models about how to sustain social norms, of which cooperative social norms are a subclass; and (2) these models contain what are called _multiple stable equilibria_, which means that under the identical conditions there are stable states for the populations in which no costly norms exist and states in which costly norms are adhered to and cooperation is sustained. In other words, there are stable states of the population of both defection and adherence to costly norms depending on the frequencies of different stategies in the population. 
- These models are best understood as products of cultural rather than genetic evolution. This is because even if they are products of genetic evolution, "most rely on one or more key cultural products, like (1) shared behavioral standards (what counts as "cooperation" or qualifies as "good standing), (2) recognized social roles (who is a "donor"), and (3) the ability to disseminate reputational information. Additionally, none of these models has been successfully applied to explaining cooperation in non-humans. Moreover, experimental data indicate that non-human primates do not engage in third-party punishment, care about or process reputational information, and possess no inclination to cooperate with strangers. 
- Facing different ecological, social, economic, political, etc. forces we should expect cultural evolution to have created distinct combinations of these cooperation-sustaining mechansisms in different ways in different societies and in different behavioral domains. 
- "Cultural evolution suggests that small communities lke those in Fiji require different mechanisms to sustain cooperation than those necessary in large, anonymous societies."
- Whereas diffuse punishment is common among WEIRD soceities, it runs several risks in tightly knit, small-scale societies such as (1) the threat of retaliation or counter-punishment (i.e., revenge) against the punisher and/or their family and (2) damaging a long-term relationship from which one cannot easily escape. In contrast, large anonymous societies like many WEIRD societies are characterized by high levels of residential mobility and formal policing institutions, both of which mitigate the risks of diffuse punishment that are seen in smaller tightly-knit societies, permitting diffuse punishement. Empirical data affirms this using behavioral economic experiments across a range of societies of subsistence styles. One study shows that a society's willingness to punish second and thrid parties in the ultimatum game and the htird party punishment game is predicted by community size. 